.\" debug.h man page
.\" Author: GitHub Copilot
.\" Date: 2025-12-17
.\"
.TH DEBUG.H 3 "December 2025" "version 2.0" "C/C++ Debug Library"
.SH NAME
debug.h \- Battle-hardened debugging header for C23/C++23
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #define DEBUG_LEVEL 5
.B #define DEBUG_TIMESTAMPS
.B #define DEBUG_COLORS
.B #define DEBUG_THREAD_SAFE
.B #include <debug.h>
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B debug.h
is a feature-complete, header-only debugging library that provides:
.IP \(bu 2
Five log levels (TRACE, DEBUG, INFO, WARN, ERROR)
.IP \(bu 2
Function entry/exit tracing with return value logging
.IP \(bu 2
Type-safe variable inspection using C11 _Generic
.IP \(bu 2
Cross-platform backtrace support (Linux, macOS, Windows)
.IP \(bu 2
Thread-safe logging with optional mutex
.IP \(bu 2
Timestamps in log output
.IP \(bu 2
ANSI color output
.IP \(bu 2
Output redirection to files or custom handlers
.IP \(bu 2
Zero runtime cost when compiled with
.B -DNDEBUG
.PP
.SH CONFIGURATION MACROS
Define these before including debug.h:
.TP
.B DEBUG_LEVEL
Set verbosity level (0-5). Default is 5 (full). Levels are:
.RS
.IP 1
LOG_ERROR - Error messages only
.IP 2
LOG_WARN - Warnings and errors
.IP 3
LOG_INFO - Info, warnings, and errors
.IP 4
LOG_DEBUG - Debug info and above
.IP 5
LOG_TRACE - Full tracing (most verbose)
.RE
.TP
.B DEBUG_TIMESTAMPS
Enable timestamp prefixes in log output (format: YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS).
.TP
.B DEBUG_COLORS
Enable ANSI color codes in output:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
ERROR - Red (bold)
.IP \(bu 2
WARN - Yellow
.IP \(bu 2
INFO - Green
.IP \(bu 2
DEBUG - Cyan
.IP \(bu 2
TRACE - Magenta
.RE
.TP
.B DEBUG_THREAD_SAFE
Enable mutex locking for thread-safe logging. Uses pthread on POSIX, std::mutex on C++.
.TP
.B NDEBUG
Standard macro to disable all debug code (zero overhead in release builds).
.SH LOGGING MACROS
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_TRACE(" fmt ", ...);"
Log message at TRACE level (most verbose).
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_DEBUG(" fmt ", ...);"
Log message at DEBUG level.
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_INFO(" fmt ", ...);"
Log message at INFO level.
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_WARN(" fmt ", ...);"
Log message at WARN level.
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_ERROR(" fmt ", ...);"
Log message at ERROR level (least verbose).
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_LOG(" level ", " fmt ", ...);"
Log message at specified level constant.
.PP
.SH FUNCTION TRACING
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_ENTER(" fmt ", ...);"
Log function entry. Place at the beginning of functions.
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_EXIT(" return_value ");"
Log function exit with return value and return. Uses _Generic for type-safe value printing in C.
.PP
.B Example:
.nf
int factorial(int n) {
    DEBUG_ENTER("(n=%d)", n);
    if (n <= 1) DEBUG_EXIT(1);
    int result = n * factorial(n - 1);
    DEBUG_EXIT(result);
}
.fi
.SH VARIABLE INSPECTION
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_VAR(" variable ");"
Print variable name and value. Uses _Generic for type-safe formatting of int, unsigned int, long, unsigned long, double, char*, void*.
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_PTR(" pointer ", " size_description ");"
Print pointer address and description string.
.PP
.B Example:
.nf
int count = 42;
char *name = "test";
DEBUG_VAR(count);   // Output: VAR count = 42
DEBUG_VAR(name);    // Output: VAR name = test
DEBUG_PTR(name, "5 chars + null");
.fi
.SH MEMORY ALLOCATION
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_MALLOC(" size ");"
Wrapper for malloc() that logs allocation address and size.
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_FREE(" pointer ");"
Wrapper for free() that logs the freed pointer.
.PP
.B Example:
.nf
void *buf = DEBUG_MALLOC(1024);
// ... use buffer ...
DEBUG_FREE(buf);
.fi
.SH ASSERTIONS
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_ASSERT(" expression ", " fmt ", ...);"
Enhanced assert with backtrace. Aborts if expression is false.
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_CHECK(" expression ", " fmt ", ...);"
Soft check - logs warning with backtrace but continues execution.
.PP
.B Example:
.nf
DEBUG_ASSERT(ptr != NULL, "Pointer is NULL!");
DEBUG_CHECK(value >= 0, "Warning: negative value %d", value);
.fi
.SH BACKTRACE
.TP
.B DEBUG_BACKTRACE();
Print current stack trace. Requires
.B -rdynamic
linker flag for symbols on Linux.
.PP
Works on Linux (execinfo.h), macOS (execinfo.h), and Windows (dbghelp).
.SH LOOP TRACING
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_LOOP_START(" fmt ", ...);"
Mark the start of a loop.
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_LOOP_ITER(" index ", " total ");"
Log loop iteration (at DEBUG level).
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_LOOP_END(" fmt ", ...);"
Mark the end of a loop.
.PP
.B Example:
.nf
DEBUG_LOOP_START("Processing items");
for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
    DEBUG_LOOP_ITER(i, n);
    process(items[i]);
}
DEBUG_LOOP_END("Done");
.fi
.SH GDB INTEGRATION
.TP
.B DEBUG_BREAK();
Insert a breakpoint using
.BR __builtin_trap() .
Triggers SIGTRAP in GDB.
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_IF(" expression ") { ... }"
Conditional block that only executes if expression is true and DEBUG_LEVEL >= LOG_TRACE.
.SH OUTPUT REDIRECTION
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_SET_OUTPUT(" file ");"
Redirect debug output to specified FILE pointer.
.TP
.B DEBUG_RESET_OUTPUT();
Reset debug output to stderr (default).
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_SET_HANDLER(" handler ");"
Set custom output handler function.
.PP
.B Example:
.nf
FILE *logfile = fopen("debug.log", "w");
DEBUG_SET_OUTPUT(logfile);
DEBUG_INFO("This goes to the file");
DEBUG_RESET_OUTPUT();
fclose(logfile);
.fi
.SH SCOPE HELPERS
.TP
.B DEBUG_SCOPE_BEGIN();
Equivalent to DEBUG_ENTER() for scope entry.
.TP
.B DEBUG_SCOPE_END();
Equivalent to DEBUG_EXIT((void)0) for scope exit.
.SH ABORT
.TP
.BI "DEBUG_ABORT(" msg ", ...);"
Log error message with backtrace and call abort(). Useful for unrecoverable errors.
.SH COMPILATION
.B Debug build:
.nf
gcc -std=c23 -g -O0 -Wall -Wextra -rdynamic -o prog prog.c
.fi
.PP
.B Release build (no debug overhead):
.nf
gcc -std=c23 -O2 -DNDEBUG -o prog prog.c
.fi
.PP
.B Thread-safe:
.nf
#define DEBUG_THREAD_SAFE
#include "debug.h"
// Compile with: -pthread
.fi
.SH PLATFORM SUPPORT
.IP Linux
Full support including backtrace with symbols (use -rdynamic).
.IP macOS
Full support including backtrace.
.IP Windows
Full support. MSVC uses CaptureStackBackTrace and dbghelp. MinGW has fallback.
.SH NOTES
.IP \(bu 2
Uses GCC extensions (__PRETTY_FUNCTION__, __builtin_trap()). Works with Clang.
.IP \(bu 2
Uses C11 _Generic for type-safe printing (not used in C++ mode).
.IP \(bu 2
Uses __VA_OPT__ for clean variadic handling (C23).
.IP \(bu 2
Warnings from _Generic in non-matching branches are expected (all branches compile but only one executes).
.SH EXAMPLE
.nf
#define DEBUG_LEVEL 5
#define DEBUG_TIMESTAMPS
#define DEBUG_COLORS
#include "debug.h"

typedef struct {
    int id;
    char name[32];
} User;

User* create_user(int id, const char* name) {
    DEBUG_ENTER("(id=%d, name=%s)", id, name);
    
    User* u = (User*)DEBUG_MALLOC(sizeof(User));
    DEBUG_ASSERT(u != NULL, "Allocation failed!");
    
    u->id = id;
    strncpy(u->name, name, sizeof(u->name) - 1);
    u->name[sizeof(u->name) - 1] = '\\0';
    
    DEBUG_PTR(u, "User struct");
    DEBUG_VAR(u->id);
    DEBUG_EXIT(u);
}

void process_users(User** users, int count) {
    DEBUG_ENTER("(count=%d)", count);
    DEBUG_CHECK(count > 0, "No users to process");
    
    DEBUG_LOOP_START("Processing users");
    for (int i = 0; i < count; i++) {
        DEBUG_LOOP_ITER(i, count);
        DEBUG_INFO("Processing user: %s", users[i]->name);
    }
    DEBUG_LOOP_END();
}

int main(void) {
    User* u = create_user(1, "Alice");
    if (u) {
        DEBUG_FREE(u);
    }
    return 0;
}
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR assert (3),
.BR backtrace (3),
.BR pthread_mutex_lock (3)
.SH AUTHOR
GitHub Copilot for EdgeOfAssembly/RetroCodeMess
.SH COPYRIGHT
MIT License
